Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lobs, and
today I'm joined by Doctor Roy Richard Grinker. He
is professor of anthropology and international affairs at the
George Washington University, and today we're going to talk
about his book, Nobody's Normal, How Culture Created the
Stigma of Mental Illness. So Doctor, Doctor Grinker, welcome
to the show. It's a pleasure to everyone.
Yeah, thank you for having me.
So, um, since you are a cultural anthropologist, how
do you approach the topic of mental illness from
the point of view of cultural anthropology? I mean,
what kinds of questions can cultural anthropology answer on
this topic?
I think it's important to uh recognize that all
forms of life, uh, whether it's a medical illness,
uh, like a cancer or an infection, uh, or
a mental illness, all of these, uh, experiences are
within certain historical and cultural contexts. And so anthropology
has a long history of looking at how people
express suffering and how they seek to alleviate suffering,
uh, throughout the world, but they're going to do
it in very different ways, right? They have different
idioms of distress, and we could look at the
differences between, say, uh, you know, how one Um,
uh, exhibits, uh, a psychosis in, uh, the rainforests
of Central Africa, uh, versus how a psychosis is
experienced in Washington DC, but we can also look
at the cross-historical relationships, so that schizophrenia was not
the same in the 1700s as it is today.
Depression was not the same in the 1900s as
it is today. Uh, THE post-traumatic stress from war
trauma was not the same in the Civil War
as it is today. And so what anthropologists look
at is the cultural variation. And why is that
important? Because if culture is responsible for the ways
in which we suffer and seek to ameliorate our
suffering, then, you know, that's under human control. We
can change that. We can do something about it
if we need to.
But I mean, what is mental illness then? Um,
HOW do you use that term in cultural anthropology?
Well, mental illness is a pretty modern term actually,
uh, because, uh, one had to, uh, distinguish between
the mental and the physical, the body and the
mind in order to get there. Uh, YOU know,
the centuries ago, there was illness, and it was
a combination of the body and the mind, but
once we separated, uh, body and mind, uh, particularly,
you know, in the Enlightenment in Europe, um, it
became possible. Excuse me, to Um, to isolate certain
forms of suffering to the brain and to an
individual, and that really set, uh, set the stage
for stigma, for stigmatizing somebody who, uh, failed in
some way culturally as an individual. Um, I used
illness as opposed to disorder. Uh, BECAUSE disorder, I
think, evokes a lot of the, uh, uh, pejorative
uses of, of terms that relate to mental illness
like losing it out of whack. You know, one
can short of a six pack or uh uh
going crazy, um, going nuts, things like that. Those
have to do with disorder, but we don't know
what an ordered mind looks like. What is an
ordered mind? What is a disordered mind then? Uh,
SO I prefer illness because illness refers not to
something being out of order. Illness refers to an
experience of some kind of suffering, uh, in which
there are idioms of distress and people say, I
am, I'm feeling this way and I don't want
to feel this way.
Mm, uh, but what is stigma then? I mean,
what does that mean?
The stigma comes from the, the ancient Greek for
a branding, um, a mark that, uh, like a,
a scar, uh, that exists on you, you know,
the ancient Greeks used the concept of stigma, uh,
as for branding slaves, right? So, so stigma is
really that kind of shadow that we cast upon
a person who doesn't fit our norms. And so,
The, the normal, the abnormal, you know, that, that
is really a variant of what any society finds
good and what any society finds bad, and the,
the problem with stigma is not just that society
can shame, humiliate, marginalize, discriminate against somebody that doesn't
conform to a particular norm. But that we can
do it to ourselves, you know, we, we, we
internalize this idea of what is good and bad,
and we can stigmatize ourselves or, you know, so-called
self-stigma, uh, and that can be, you know, incredibly,
uh, dangerous to one's mental health.
And what are the origins of stigma surrounding mental
illness, and of course you've already said that the
people in cultures that are not, let's say Western
cultures, uh, people that live in more traditional societies,
for example, do not have and do not approach
what we call. Mental illness the same way, but
do we also find stigma associated with non-normative kinds
of behaviors in non-Western societies,
or not? Yes, there are people who are stigmatized
throughout the world for various kinds of conditions. Um,
THE, the stigma seems to be exacerbated when the
Suffering or the illness or the difference is thought
to be contained within the individual. And, and this
is why the rise of the concept of mental
illness occurred in early capitalism, where the individual became
the, the, the agent of, of, of their life.
They were responsible. It's not God, it's or, or
society, it's the individual. And Actually, the very first
asylums for the mentally ill in Western Europe, particularly
in France, were designed to remove from society those
people who didn't conform to the ideals. And that
ideal was the independent autonomous worker. So the first
asylums were kind of, were populated by people who
didn't work. And, and the first asylum in um
Uh, in France, uh, had as its mandate to
house the idol. It was really about people who
didn't conform to capitalism. So, uh, stigma tends to
be associated with people who don't fit the norms
of a society. Now, let's say you are, uh,
in the Kalahari Desert and you hear voices, um,
that may not, uh, be something that is associated
with a problem within you. But which manifested in
you. So perhaps it was something that is wrong
with your family or some, or it's a spiritual
um revenge for something that somebody else in your
family did. It may affect you randomly, but it's
not your fault, and it's not something that you
caused. Um, AND you suffer, and so you may
not, your, your whole community could be stigmatized as,
as having an illness, but you as an individual
aren't necessarily marked or branded or stigmatized as somehow,
you know, forever, uh, forever sick.
Mhm. Uh, BUT I mean, uh, what kinds of
stigma tend to be associated with mental illness and
in what ways do they affect the lives of
people who suffer from mental illness?
Well, it depends on, you know, the condition, uh,
but for much of the 20th century, um, homosexuality
was stigmatized, and what that meant was that people
suffered thinking that they were defective. Or that, you
know, they didn't belong. Uh, IF somebody has depression,
they may see themselves as unworthy, um, as, uh,
undeserving of care and not even seek care. Uh,
SOMEBODY who, um, is, uh, stigmatized is somebody who
feels that, um, they, they, they should be alone
and they shouldn't seek support. Uh, SOMEBODY who's stigmatized
may evoke fear and so people don't talk to
them and they don't reach out to them. Um,
EVERY society has some form of stigma, what, however
that takes, you know, whether it's exiling somebody or
marginalizing somebody or punishing someone or discriminating against them,
but the forms of discrimination. And the object of
that discrimination will vary from place to place and
time to time.
So you mentioned capitalism earlier, um, how did people,
at least in the West, approach mental illness before
the advent of capitalism?
Uh, MENTAL illness wasn't marked out as something that
was distinct from other forms of disability. So, I
mentioned earlier the first asylums in, in France. Um,
THE, the first asylum, one of the first asylums,
the Sault Petriere, famous, you know, asylum, uh, 18th,
early 18th century, um, you have, uh, people with
all kinds of variations lumped together, undifferentiated. So you
have people who perhaps have lost a limb. Uh,
SOMEONE who's blind or deaf or mute, someone who
is a criminal. Somebody who is an alcoholic and
somebody who hears voices, and they're in this sort
of undifferentiated mass. And by the time these asylums
in place, you're starting to see a mass movement
of people who are confined, and there are estimates
that at some point in the 18th century, nearly
1% of the population of Paris was confined. And
this was the first time that so many people
had been in one place that scientists could look
at them and say, well, there's so many people
here, we better classify them. And mark them out
and separate the criminal from the beggar and separate
the beggar from the person with the physical disability
or the person with leprosy or whatever that might
be. And that is where mental illness categories emerge.
It's in that separation of the people who are
confined. So it's confinement that precedes the development of
a concept of mental illness. You also could not
have the concept of mental illness without, as I
said earlier, the separation of body and mind. This
idea where there are diseases of the body and
there are diseases of the mind.
So that was uh around the time when a
modern understanding of mental illness as we have it
now was developed.
Yes, yeah, and, and it, it was used for
particular historical purposes that were unique to those times.
So, for example, the, when the idea that there
were diseases of the body and diseases of the
mind, uh, came about, uh, elites could say, ah,
well, the, uh, the, the diseases of the body
belong to, to those of us who can Uh,
who can control our minds, but the poor, the
weak, the, the immigrant, they actually, uh, can't control
themselves and their bodies are taking control over their
minds. And so they've developed various theories. About how
the separation of body and mind could act differently
on people depending on their social status. And so
this is how culture and history and illness combine
together. Right. This is where they meet, this is
where they influence each other. So, you know, even
as late as the late 19th century in the
United States and Europe, uh, there were thoughts that
mental illnesses like depression, Uh, were really distinctive to
highly educated, uh, high status people, whereas the worker,
his or her mind was driven by the body
and impulses and, and primal urges. And so one
could have depression, uh, if you were of high
status, but you might not have depression without that.
It was associated with people like Freud and Remington
and Darwin and, you know, great thinkers who experienced
bouts of depression. It was associated with the use
of the mind.
Very interesting. Uh, IN what ways would you say
uh capitalism might have contributed to the stigma of
mental illness or uh expanding, uh, what we stigmatize
in terms of how people express themselves behaviorally and
psychologically. Well,
what is the ideal person in a capitalist society?
A productive person, a productive person, uh, uh, a
person who is responsible for themselves. Uh, WHO is
autonomous and independent, can go out and shape their
own distinct household as a unit of production. And
so if you are dependent on others, you do
not fit into that capitalist model. Right. So, so,
so, so that, that's really the source of stigma
in Western Europe and North America, whereas the source
of stigma in another society could be something that's
different. So I'm not saying that capitalism causes mental
illness or that capitalism causes stigma. I'm just saying
that if we live in a society that has
these particular ideals that are born out of a
certain social and economic system, it's not surprising that
they will shape. The way in which we experience
difference and the way in which we express our
suffering.
And do you think that we can also see
that manifesting today that perhaps many people who get
mental illness label, whatever it might be, are, I
mean, many times might just be people who are
not adjusted to a capitalist society.
Well, I think we're making a lot of progress
um where we're seeing. Um, MENTAL illnesses as sort
of part of the normal range of experience that
humans have. Um, AND I felt this when I
was growing up. I mean, I, I grew up
in a, a, a Family of psychiatrists and psychoanalysts,
and I was kind of raised to think that
everybody had a little mental illness or, you know,
it's some, we're all on some common spectrum together,
right? Um, AND that, um, at some point in
your life, you're going to experience, you know, emotional
distress and emotional suffering. Um, WHERE does that, you
know, at what point does that become an illness?
So like, if you're shy, at what point does
shyness become so severe that it might be autism
or sadness? At what point does the normal sadness
someone might feel become clinical depression? Where does the
normal anxiety that we have that makes me, you
know, look both ways before I cross the street,
that's adaptive for all humans, become an anxiety disorder?
That is a clinical judgment. On whether that illness
or that extent, that symptom. Uh, KEEPS you from
doing the things that you want to do and
that society expects you to do. And so, the
point at which something becomes an illness is when
you can't function. It's really about functionality. Um, AND
that depends on what function you, you know, you
need to, to serve. So, a child can have
certain symptoms that don't warrant a diagnosis until they
go to school. And they could function at home,
but now they can't function at school, and the
diagnosis helps to drive some sort of intervention or
treatment, right? Um, I can be sad when my
loved one dies, but if it gets to the
point where I can't get up in the morning
and can't go to work, then it requires something
else, which is a treatment, and diagnoses always drive,
or they should drive treatments. So I think that
because we have more and more diagnoses today, and
there's more understanding of this idea of us all
existing on a spectrum together. That the stigma of
mental illness is decreasing, and I think it's decreasing
rapidly. We're now seeing young people living longer at
homes with their parents or other family members. We're
seeing uh new family configurations that are making social
supports possible. And so these are still within the
same kind of, you know, social system, capitalist system,
economic system, but we, we can change it and
we can adapt and we can adjust. And so,
I think these, the, uh, the norm of the
highly autonomous uh individual who shields their suffering from
everybody else and eschews any kind of diagnosis is
decreasing rapidly. And that's a good thing. Mhm.
Uh, SO I would like to just take a
step back and ask you a few questions about
how our understanding of mental illness was shaped throughout
the 20th century, and I would like to start
by asking you about how it was shaped particularly
by war in the 20th century.
Wars are really, I'm glad you brought that up.
It's a really interesting topic because, um, you know,
we think of wars often as aberrations, um, but,
um, they're not just, uh, uh, distinctive periods of
time in which things are not going well, but
they also, because of the kinds of disruptions that
occur in wars, can actually be productive. And I'm
not saying war is good. I'm just saying that,
that, that wars don't just start and end. Things
happen within them. I mean we, that we developed
anesthesia in the Civil War. Um, WE developed a
jet technology during World War 1 and World War
2. THINGS, things change. Things develop sometimes, you know,
at a very rapid pace. And one of the
things that has happened during, particularly World War 1
and World War 2 was the recognition that people
who suffer from trauma emotionally. Um, ARE not abnormal
people. They are Just people who are in abnormal
circumstances. And so, the, the idea of being emotionally
affected for many years on by, by witnessing or
being involved with a traumatic experience, um, has become
somewhat normalized. Um, As as something that we should
even expect. So, you see today when there are
tragedies around the world, that mental health care workers
go to these places because there is the expectation
that this will happen. Not that, oh, there's some
abnormal people out there, but there are normal people
who um are going to suffer. And, and so
wars really helped take mental illness out of the
asylum. It wasn't just something where you took somebody
and locked them away, but something that we could
do something about. That you could provide care. Now,
that's not to say that Our treatment of people
with mental illnesses didn't change. In World War One,
the symptoms of mental illness were usually physical. They
were things like sweating, um, diarrhea, stomach aches, uh,
sometimes, uh, an arm would be paralyzed, you couldn't
smell, you couldn't speak, uh, you couldn't balance yourself,
and you would fall over and you had an
awkward gait. Because those were the questions that doctors
asked, like, what, what are your, what are your
physical symptoms after this trauma. Um, AND then by
World War II, we have the advent of psychoanalysis.
And the doctors are now asking questions about how
do you feel. What are you thinking about? What
are you dreaming about? And so, patients who experienced
trauma in World War II started to experience that
trauma more in emotional terms than in physical terms.
And they started to describe their symptoms, therefore, as
anxiety, depression, fear, things like that. Um, SO we
could say on the one hand, that there's always
been trauma, but how it gets experienced, you know,
the idiom of distress changes. And that's even true
with something like uh a psychotic disorder, right? So,
if you live in the United States, your paranoia
might have to do with the CIA watching you.
Or through your television, maybe. But what if you
live in the middle of a rainforest in Central
Africa? You don't have the CIA there. What, what,
what, how do you, what is your idiom of
distress? It might be that there are witches or
sorcerers or some evil force that's watching you. We,
you know, with bipolar disorder, people often say, oh,
this so and so imagines that they are a
God or imagines that they are Jesus Christ or
so on, but you can't. Imagine that you're something
unless you know about it, right? And so idioms
of distress are different depending on where we live
and the kind of material we have, uh, in
our society.
That's very interesting. So do you think that different
idioms of distress might help, uh, more or less
people deal with their psychological distress?
Well, an idiom of distress is a form of
communication. It is, it is, it, it is the,
um, the primary, what, what psychologists sometimes call the
primary gain. In illness, you have a primary gain
and a secondary gain. The primary gain is to
draw attention to your suffering. So that's why you
have the symptom. The secondary gain is that society
does something for you or your family does something
for you. So, um, idioms of distress, how we
describe our suffering, um, are very, very important. They
just may not be understandable to everybody. Across cultures.
Let me give you an example from, uh, the
from America. Uh, IT has long been common for
many American Indian groups to, um, for members of
American Indian groups after the loss of a loved
one, to hear that, the voice of that loved
one in their head, uh, for one or two
weeks after the death. Um Now, probably 10 out
of 10 emergency room doctors would say that's a
psychosis. But in fact, it's not a psychosis. It's
something that's normative and um American Indian communities, and
it has nothing to do with mental illness. It
has to do with how people express and experience
grief and not wanting to lose touch with the
loved one and and having that voice in in
one's head can be be comforting. So, um, The
idiom of distress may not be understandable, you know,
across cultures. There was for a time, uh, what
looked like an epidemic in West Africa of, uh,
people believing that, that their penises, men believing their
penises were being stolen spiritually. Um, IT didn't make
sense to most people who were trained in Western
medical care, but it made a lot of sense
to doctors in West Africa who understood that this
was an idiom of distress related to urbanization. The,
um, the threats to, uh, family and ethnic identity
and the influx of strangers into their community that
they thought might somehow threaten the, um, integrity of,
of their kinship groups, but it made sense to
them, but didn't make sense, it wouldn't make sense
to us, right? Um, AND throughout the world, there
are what are sometimes referred to as cultural idioms
of distress, which used to be called culture-bound syndromes.
These are syndromes that are distinctive to particular locations,
like, uh, Lata, which is a hyperstartling disease in
Southeast Asia, uh, Koro, uh, which is a disease
in some parts of southern China. In which people
believe that their genitals are being sucked up into
the body. Koro comes from the Malaysian word for
the head of the turtle. Um, AND, uh, and
so we, we see these, um, kinds of idioms
of distress around the world, and it's not that
people are psychotic or crazy. Um, IT'S that, that,
that the culture affects the way in which we
experience ourselves. And, um, you know, we need only
look at autism today. And the dramatic increase in
diagnosis of autism, particularly among older children and adults,
to see that we are embracing a new form,
a new idiom of disability and need, uh, that,
that we didn't embrace in the past.
Uh, HOW do you approach or how do you
look at the rise of, uh, mental illness diagnosis,
like you mentioned autism, there's also, of course, depression
earlier, you also mentioned or referred to ADHD. Um,
WHAT do you make of that?
Well, I wouldn't say that that necessarily an increase
in autism, ADHD and other mental illnesses, but an
increase in diagnosis and treatment. Um, WHEN there were,
um, really, uh, when there was really a scarcity
of treatments in the mid-twentieth century, epidemiologic studies showed
that the, uh, prevalence of mental illnesses was far,
far higher. THAN anybody guessed through the epidemiologic studies.
And yet if you looked at clinic records, insurance
records, things like that, it didn't look like there
was that much mental illness. But if you actually
went out and knocked on every door and, and
looked at everybody and, you know, left no stone
unturned, you would find a lot of mental illness.
And so what's happening now is that people are
getting diagnoses that they didn't get in the past.
So maybe The person with ADHD was in the
past, I don't know, discriminated or stigmatized as somebody
who was A bad student or a loser, or,
or,
or lazy
or lazy, right, right. Um, AND, uh, and you
know, we see, we see this in microcosm with
particular individuals. One of the things in my book,
Nobody's Normal, I write about a freshman, I taught
a freshman seminar, so it's just freshmen coming into
George Washington University. They're 17 years old, 18 years
old, max, maximum. And I was asking them at
the end, you know, what's been the best, it's
your first semester of college, what's been the best
thing so far about your semester? And one student
said, oh, the best thing about my semester was
getting diagnosed with ADHD. I was like, oh, tell
us, you know, if you feel comfortable, tell us
about that. And she said, well, my parents always
told me that I was lazy or just not
that smart. And I would say, no, I think
something's wrong with me, and they say, no, you're
just not working hard enough. You're not trying hard
enough. And it was when she got to college
that she was able to act on her own.
Um, AND go to a counselor, go to a
psychologist, and she received the diagnosis of ADHD, and
she said that was just the first time in
my life that somebody saw that I wasn't lazy,
I wasn't stupid, that I actually Just needed some
support or accommodation, and in her case, it was,
uh, a medication plus a little extra time on
exams, and she was excelling in her school, right?
So, this is somebody who in the past might
not have had any diagnosis at all, um, particularly
people with autism who are diagnosed late in life,
um, uh, and this, their, their symptoms are not
particularly Um, profound or highly disabling, um, people without
an intellectual disability, for example, uh, they are, you
know, they're getting diagnosed now and they would have
just been considered weird or loners or, or awkward
or nerds or geeks or who knows what in
the past. Um, AND so we're finding new ways
to, um, Uh, to provide labels that don't stigmatize,
that aren't negative.
Right, um. How do you look at the advent
of the DSM and, um, I mean, diagnostic manuals
and how things have changed, changed in terms of
how we approach the classification of mental illness over
the past few decades.
That's a huge question. Um, HUGE question. Um, AND
you can answer that question from a number of
different, uh, perspectives. So one thing that, that, that's,
that's true is that, uh, the field of psychology
and psychiatry, clinical psychology and psychiatry used to be,
uh, something that was not standardized. So if I
was studying something in France and you're studying something
in the United States, how do I know that
we're studying the same thing, right? How do I
know that we're, we're actually studying the same thing?
The DSM was a way to help to standardize
so that at least you could compare results from
across different places. And so it played a huge
role in Uh, in, in, in the development of
the mental health professions. On the other hand, when
you create these diagnostic classifications, You start to fix
in stone. A set of criteria that then make
it seem like this condition actually is real. So
when autism gets introduced into the DSM, Um, It's
thought of as being something real. It's not that
doctors discovered something new that they called autism. What
they did was that they said, oh, you know,
there are these symptoms over here and these symptoms
over here, and they often go together, and they
often coexist with each other. So, let's, uh, let,
let's see if, um, maybe there is a term
that we can have that will help us to
capture that. And so then we start to think
that autism is a real disease that has a
real objective existence, when in fact, there are probably
100 autisms or 150 different autisms. And so, you
know, there are pluses and minuses, right? Uh,
I have just one last question then also because
I'm looking at the time and I know that
we only have 9 minutes left or something like
that. That, so, uh, and referring directly to, uh,
the title of your book, Nobody's Normal, uh, I
mean, what, uh, do you mean by that exactly?
I mean, is anyone normal? How do you approach
that question?
I actually got the title from a student, um,
and, uh, who, who, you know, basically who, who
said, you know, nobody's normal. Is anybody normal anymore?
And I said, no, no, nobody's normal. Um, BECAUSE
normal is a construction, right? Normal used to mean
100 years ago, the average, the norm, the mean,
norm. So we, we in the United States, we
had normal schools. They were, you know, designed to
teach the norm, uh, of, of, of what was
in society, but, um, what, uh, uh, what happened
over the 20th century is that normal shifted from
being a statistical average. To being something you wanted
to aspire to. I want to be normal, and
normal is a variant of the good, right? So
nobody it fits something that is the norm because
the norm is always changing. And the norm is
something that we have constructed. Right? So, we use
the term normal here and there and say, oh,
you know, I know you had a flight delay,
but that's normal. Um, WE mean statistically normal. But
increasingly, we are moving and our, this is what
my book tries to document, away from this idea
that there are human beings who are normal and
abnormal, right? And so, when you look at a
group of students like the ones I had who
have ADHD or autism or whatever, um, uh, they
recognize that normal is an ideal construction. Rather than
something which is grounded in Um, in some kind
of objective fact. So what would a normal human
being look like? I don't know. And what would
an abnormal human being look like? Each is a
case by case. Um, Example that. Has to be
assessed in terms of what we consider to be
healthy, not healthy, allowing a human being to do
what they want to do and build a meaningful
life. So, if I have autism and I build
a meaningful life, Just, you know, because of or
despite. My autism Is it there then that I'm,
am I abnormal? You know, the, the when you
start asking that question, you realize how absurd it
is to think that there's any such thing in
the world as normal or, or abnormal. There are
variations, and we all exist on a spectrum.
Great, so Doctor Grinker, uh, the book is again
Nobody's Normal, How Culture Created the Stigma of Mental
Illness. I'm leaving a link to it in the
description of the interview, and would you like to
tell people where they can find you and your
work on the internet?
Um, WELL, uh, I don't have a web, a,
uh, a personal website right now, uh, but my
work is available on, uh, all the major booksellers,
um, sites and, uh, in academic journals as well,
and I'm at the George Washington University.
OK, great. So thank you so much for taking
the time to come on the show. It's been
a real pleasure to talk with you. Thank you.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at enlights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Muller, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingbird, Arnaud Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forrest Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoro, and
Hal Herz Agnon, Mahel Jonathan Labrarinth, John Yardston, and
Samuel Curric Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel,
Sardusran, David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezaraujo Romain Roach, Diego
Londono Correa. Yannik Punteran Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro,
Adam Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alekbaka, Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov,
Zal Adrian Yei Poltontin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward
Hall, Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolatti, Gabriel P
Scortez or Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, Sony
Smith, and Wisman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg
Jarno, Luke Lovai, Georgios Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin,
David Williams, Di Acosta, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex
Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D.
Lee Junior. Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber,
Robert Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix,
Mark Kempel, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly
Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson,
Ismael Bensleyman. George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate
Van Goler, Alexander Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali
Mohammadi, Perpendicular, Jannes Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David
Pinsov, Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A
special thanks to my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank
Lucas Stink, Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller,
Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlomon Negro,
Al Nick Cortiz and Nick Golden, and to my
executive producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and
Rosie. Thank you for all.